Create rule S6497[Docker]: Using a container image based on its digest is security-sensitive (APPSEC-443) (#1515)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6497/docker/rule.adoc

> Pulling an image based on its `digest` can lead to avoidable risks that could
> have been remedied with image updates.
> 
> In general, the use of image digests instead of tags is intended to keep
> determinism stable within a system or infrastructure for reliability reasons.
> 
> The problem with this is that using a digest as an image makes it immutable and
> raises a number of other reliability issues:
> 
> * Security - The lack of security updates for a dependency introduces risks that could have been avoided.
> * Maintainability - The indeterminacy of a hard-coded digest as an identifier makes it difficult to scale code.
> 
> **Warning**: Specifying a tag *and* a digest provides no guarantee that the
> digest was not referenced by the tag in the past or present.
> 
> Docker uses the digest regardless of the presence of a specified tag when it
> retrieves an image.  This means that the container below does not retrieve
> `openjdk:21-oracle`, but actually retrieves the image referenced by the
> specified digest, namely
> https://hub.docker.com/layers/library/openjdk/11-jre-bullseye/images/sha256-762d8d035c3b1c98d30c5385f394f4d762302ba9ee8e0da8c93344c688d160b2[`openjdk:11-jre-bullseye`].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pulling an image based on its `digest` can lead to avoidable risks that could
have been remedied with image updates.

In general, the use of image digests instead of tags is intended to keep
determinism stable within a system or infrastructure for reliability reasons.

The problem with this is that using a digest as an image makes it immutable and
raises several other reliability issues:

* Security - The lack of security updates for a dependency introduces risks that could have been avoided.
* Maintainability - The indeterminacy of a hard-coded digest as an identifier makes it difficult to scale code.

**Warning**: Specifying a tag *and* a digest provides no guarantee that 
the tag did reference the digest at any point in time.

Docker uses the digest regardless of the presence of a specified tag when it
retrieves an image.  This means that the container below does not retrieve
`openjdk:21-oracle`, but retrieves the image referenced by the specified digest,
namely
https://hub.docker.com/layers/library/openjdk/11-jre-bullseye/images/sha256-762d8d035c3b1c98d30c5385f394f4d762302ba9ee8e0da8c93344c688d160b2[`openjdk:11-jre-bullseye`].
```

[source,docker]
----
FROM openjdk:21-oracle@sha256:762d8d035c3b1c98d30c5385f394f4d762302ba9ee8e0da8c93344c688d160b2

> ----

Reviewer 2: I would not mention this corner case. It should probably fil in a separate rule.

== Ask Yourself Whether

* Image determinism cannot be provided by container orchestration systems.

> * The digest is hardcoded but updated in a timely manner

Reviewer 2: I am not sure these questions are helping assess if something should be changed.

The only question developer should ask are: are you expecting to receive security updates of the base image?

> * Image determinism cannot be provided by container orchestration systems.
> * The digest is hardcoded, but updated in a timely manner
> 
> There is a risk if you answer no to any of these questions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Image determinism cannot be provided by container orchestration systems.
* The digest is hardcoded but updated in a timely manner

There is a risk if you answer no to any of these questions.
```

== Recommended Secure Coding Practices

> When developing a container in a Docker file, it is important to keep in mind the systems that are responsible for the overall **reliability** of the infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When developing a container in a Dockerfile, it is important to keep in mind the systems that are responsible for the overall **reliability** of the infrastructure.
```

More specifically, the systems which are responsible for rolling back systems in the event of a disaster recovery procedure (DRP).

A balance should be struck between:

* The lack of reliability when using certain mutable tags, such as `latest`
* The lack of flexibility when using immutable tags

> 

Reviewer 2: I suggest going straight to the point: use a non-ephemeral tag E.g `mongo:6.0` (basically the part that you wrote in compliant code example)

> When developing a container in a Dockerfile, it is important to keep in mind the systems that are responsible for the overall **reliability** of the infrastructure.
> More specifically, the systems which are responsible for rolling back systems in the event of a disaster recovery procedure (DRP).
> 
> A balance should be struck between:
> 
> * The lack of reliability when using certain mutable tags, such as `latest`
> * The lack of flexibility when using immutable tags
> 
> The simplest solution is to find tags that are not as prone to change as `latest` or https://github.com/docker-library/faq#whats-the-difference-between-shared-and-simple-tags[shared tags].
> 
> Otherwise, there are several tools that allow you to benefit from both the stability of an immutable image and the security and maintainability of mutable images.
> 
> Use these tools and create pipelines to be able to
> 
> * Quickly roll back to a previously known digest version
> * Keep the image up to date by performing as frequently as possible:
> ** Digest updates
> ** Digest update testing to ensure that a Digest update does not damage critical systems
> 
> Here is a list of tools to help you maintain this balance of reliability:
> 
> * https://github.com/safe-waters/docker-lock[Docker-Lock]
> * https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/archive/using-container-image-digests-in-kubernetes-manifests#recommendations[Skaffold, kpt, digester, kustomize, gke-deploy, ko, and Bazel]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Containers should get the latest security updates. If there is a need for determinism, 
the solution is to find tags that are not as prone to change as `latest` or 
https://github.com/docker-library/faq#whats-the-difference-between-shared-and-simple-tags[shared tags].

To do so, favor a more precise tag that uses https://semver.org/[semantic versioning] and target a major version, for example.
```

> When developing a container in a Docker file, it is important to keep in mind the systems that are responsible for the overall **reliability** of the infrastructure.
> More specifically, which systems are responsible for rolling back systems in the event of a disaster recovery procedure (DRP).
> 
> A balance should be struck between:
> 
> * The lack of reliability when using certain mutable tags, such as `latest`
> * The lack of flexibility when using immutable tags
> 
> The simplest solution is to find tags that are not as prone to change as `latest` or https://github.com/docker-library/faq#whats-the-difference-between-shared-and-simple-tags[shared tags].
> 
> Otherwise, there are several tools that allow you to benefit from both the stability of an immutable image and the security and maintainability of mutable images.
> 
> Use these tools and create pipelines to be able to
> 
> * Quickly roll back to a previous known digest version
> * Keep the image up to date by performing as frequently as possible:
> ** Digest updates
> ** Digest update testing to ensure that a Digest update does not damage critical systems
> 
> Here is a list of tools to help you maintain this balance of reliability:
> 
> * https://github.com/safe-waters/docker-lock[Docker-Lock]
> * https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/archive/using-container-image-digests-in-kubernetes-manifests#recommendations[Skaffold, kpt, digester, kustomize, gke-deploy, ko, and Bazel]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When developing a container in a Docker file, it is important to keep in mind the systems that are responsible for the overall **reliability** of the infrastructure.
More specifically, the systems which are responsible for rolling back systems in the event of a disaster recovery procedure (DRP).

A balance should be struck between:

* The lack of reliability when using certain mutable tags, such as `latest`
* The lack of flexibility when using immutable tags

The simplest solution is to find tags that are not as prone to change as `latest` or https://github.com/docker-library/faq#whats-the-difference-between-shared-and-simple-tags[shared tags].

Otherwise, there are several tools that allow you to benefit from both the stability of an immutable image and the security and maintainability of mutable images.

Use these tools and create pipelines to be able to

* Quickly roll back to a previously known digest version
* Keep the image up to date by performing as frequently as possible:
** Digest updates
** Digest update testing to ensure that a Digest update does not damage critical systems

Here is a list of tools to help you maintain this balance of reliability:

* https://github.com/safe-waters/docker-lock[Docker-Lock]
* https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/archive/using-container-image-digests-in-kubernetes-manifests#recommendations[Skaffold, kpt, digester, kustomize, gke-deploy, ko, and Bazel]
```

== Sensitive Code Example

[source,docker]
----

> FROM openjdk:21@sha256:762d8d035c3b1c98d30c5385f394f4d762302ba9ee8e0da8c93344c688d160b2 # Sensitive

Reviewer: This Dockerfile retrieves `mongo:3.1.4`:

```suggestion
FROM mongo@sha256:8eb8f46e22f5ccf1feb7f0831d02032b187781b178cb971cd1222556a6cee9d1
```

RUN echo ls
----

== Compliant Solution

> As said, if there is a need for determinism, the solution goes further than
> just removing the `digest` from the statement `FROM`. One way would be to avoid
> as many overly ephemeral tags as possible and choose a more precise one:
> 
> [source,docker]
> ----
> FROM openjdk:21-ea-8-jdk-oraclelinux8
> 
> RUN echo ls
> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Here, using mongo:6.0.4 would be better than using a digest, but would prevent security updates
made to mongo:6.0.5, for example:

[source,docker]
----
FROM mongo:6.0

RUN echo ls
----
```

== See

* https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/archive/using-container-images[GKE, Using Container Image Digests]
* https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.11/architecture/core_concepts/builds_and_image_streams.html#image-streams[OpenShift, Builds and Image Streams]

ifdef::env-github,rspecator-view[]

'''
== Implementation Specification
(visible only on this page)

=== Message

> * Presence of a digest: Setting a digest poses security risks, even though it fixes a reliability issue. Make sure it is safe here.
> * Presence of digest + tag: Setting a digest poses security risks, even though it fixes a reliability issue. Make sure it is safe here. Note that the notation `\tag@digest` does not provide any warranty on the digest kind.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Setting a digest will prevent receiving updates of the base image. Make sure it is safe here.
```

=== Highlighting

* Presence of a digest: The digest

> * Presence of digest + tag: Digest + tag

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Pulling an image based on its `digest` can lead to avoidable risks that could

> have been remedied with image updates.

Reviewer 2: "lead to avoidable risks" doesn't feel right. You can probably skip this paragraph. I understand the intention to summarize the problem in one sentence. I am not sure we can do better than the title in that regard.
I also think the rest of the description is very good and introduce the key concept with a nice progression.

Reviewer: Agreed. In the case of that rule, adding the same first line as the last is a little non sense

> Pulling an image based on its `digest` can lead to avoidable risks that could
> have been remedied with image updates.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

A container image digest uniquely and immutably identifies a container image. 

> A tag, on the other hand, is a mutable reference to a container image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A tag, on the other hand, is a mutable reference to a container image.

```

This tag can be updated to point to another version of the container at any point in time. +
In general, the use of image digests instead of tags is intended to keep
determinism stable within a system or infrastructure for reliability reasons.

The problem is that pulling such an image prevents the resulting container from 
being updated or patched in order to remove vulnerabilities or significant bugs. 

== Ask Yourself Whether

* You expect to receive security updates of the base image.

There is a risk if you answer yes to this question.

== Recommended Secure Coding Practices

Containers should get the latest security updates. If there is a need for determinism, 
the solution is to find tags that are not as prone to change as `latest` or 
https://github.com/docker-library/faq#whats-the-difference-between-shared-and-simple-tags[shared tags].

To do so, favor a more precise tag that uses https://semver.org/[semantic versioning] and target a major version, for example.

== Sensitive Code Example

[source,docker]
----
FROM mongo@sha256:8eb8f46e22f5ccf1feb7f0831d02032b187781b178cb971cd1222556a6cee9d1

RUN echo ls
----

== Compliant Solution

> Here, using mongo:6.0.4 would be better than using a digest, but would prevent security updates

Reviewer 2: I am a bit confused by this sentence. Not sure why you mention 6.0.4 here since the compliant code example uses 6.0.

Reviewer: I see

Reviewer: I added "Here, mongo:6.0 is better than using a digest, and better than using a more precise version, such as 6.0.4, because it would prevent 6.0.5 security updates:"

instead

> Here, using mongo:6.0.4 would be better than using a digest, but would prevent security updates
> made to mongo:6.0.5, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, mongo:6.0 is better than using a digest, and better than using a more precise version, such as 6.0.4,
because it would prevent 6.0.5 security updates:
```
